Uterine prolapse means the uterus
falls from its normal position
above the vaginal canal.
There are different levels of severity.
In the beginning the uterus may
only drop slightly into the vaginal canal,
without causing any symptoms.
As prolapse becomes more severe,
the uterus moves lower in the canal.
Some of the uterus,
and eventually the entire uterus,
may be outside the vagina.
As the uterus moves further
down the vaginal canal,
it can put pressure on the bladder or bowel.
Symptoms can include problems with
urination or bowel movements,
lower back pain, and a feeling of
heaviness or pulling in your pelvis.
Prolapse results from weakening or
tearing of the muscles and ligaments
that normally hold the uterus in place.
Women who experience uterine prolapse
have usually had one or more vaginal births,
particularly of large babies.
Other factors that can contribute include
loss of muscle tone with aging
and lack of estrogen after menopause.